okay good morning everyone uh let's get
started uh we are approaching the end at
least of the assignment streams so for
the
undergrads next Monday you will be
submitting your results for the 10th and
final assignment you're almost at the
end good news bad news it's not the end
it's the end of the beginning when you
finish assignment 10 you will have an
experimental platform that you can
complexify in pretty much any way you
want within reason uh and to elaborate
that into your final project and we will
talk about next Tuesday we will talk uh
about what that final project should
look like what the expectations are for
you as you're working on your final
project uh between next Tuesday and the
end of the semester for those taking uh
the course for graduate credit as I
mentioned I was running a few days ahead
of you creating the differentiable
assignments for you to do I fell a
little bit behind I didn't finish making
the differentiable assignment until
Tuesday so I pushed back this submission
deadline for those taking it for
graduate credit so you all can submit T5
by 11:59 p.m. next Tuesday rather than
next Monday and then grads you're also
tackling the final project and we'll
talk about expectations for the grad
students uh as it relates to the final
project next Tuesday so we're almost
there we'll pivot next week all good any
questions about this final
mile terms of assignments question um
for the undergrad assignment is that
like I I just is that like a pretty big
assignment like TimeWise yes it is a
pretty big assignment TimeWise it's not
the most intellectually challenging of
all the assignments it's basically
ripping out this minimal Rob b nine nine
links eight joints relative absolute
coordinates joint normals there's a lot
of finicky pieces so leave yourself time
to work on assignment 10 and as I
mentioned last time don't race do
everything in baby steps add one link
one joint at a time debug everything
make every make sure everything is
literally in the right place and moving
in the right way before you add the next
piece to the
quadruped okay any other questions
okay so back to our lecture material we
are in this module on looking at open
challenges in the field these are major
challenges that are keeping evolutionary
robotics from designing a dishwasher uh
cleaning up robots and snowblowing
robots for us and all the rest where are
all the robots they're not here at least
in terms of evolutionary robotics
because there's a number of problems we
got to solve first um most of these
problems are known there are partial
solution solutions that have been
formulated in the literature and we've
started to look at some of these and we
started in last time on uh looking at
some of the potential solutions to the
most challenging problem not just in
evolutionary robotics but robotics in
general crossing the reality Gap there
are many attempts to cross the reality
Gap in the literature I picked four
representative examples we looked at the
first one last time it's got a fancy
name but a relatively simple idea
sprinkle noise into the simulator so
that when uh the artificial when The
evolutionary algorithm simulates robots
over and over again The evolutionary
algorithm never steps into the same
river twice which heraclitus said 2,000
years ago right everything is always
kind of changing so the evolutionary
process can't exploit artifacts in the
simulation that are not real in reality
works okay but that solution in turn has
some problems are some open challenges
which is where do you put noise how much
noise do you put and so on so a solution
but a partial
solution last time we started to look at
the Golem project which is a completely
different way to attack the reality Gap
problem what's the overall intuition
behind the Golem project that we
introduced last
time did we look at it last time I
mentioned men it last
time divers is like having many examples
variation absolutely you shoot an arrow
at the Target and you miss the
bullseye shoot another arrow and another
and another and another until you
eventually get lucky okay so that's the
idea behind the Golem project which was
reported in the literature in 2000 and
ended up on the New York Times the next
day basic idea is we're going to use
this brand new technology at the time
which was a 3D printer to evolve robots
as we've seen many times in this course
now and then hook up the simulator to a
3D printer and have and basically reduce
the time and effort it takes us to
actually manufacture one of our
simulated robots and if we do enough
automated design by Evolution and
automated manufacturer by 3D printers we
can design manufacturer design
manufacturer and if a lot of those
robots don't CR cross the Gap who cares
we keep going until we get one that does
that's the intuition underneath the
Golem project yeah okay we ended last
time by starting to walk through uh
exactly how the Golem project works it's
broken this experiment is broken up into
three phases first phase is going to
look very familiar to us we're going to
evolve a robot to locomote in
simulation uh and then step two we're
going to manufacture the robot with a 3D
printer step three at that time we
couldn't print all the parts of a robot
so there's still a manual part to the
manufacturing process okay something
that was kind of new that we saw last
time is that when the Golem
researchers evolved their robots in
simulation they were not just evolving
sets of synaptic weights
for a manually designed robot with a
manually designed cognitive architecture
inside they're broadening The
evolutionary algorithm and they do that
by modifying the data structure that
encodes the genotype they've got a more
complicated data structure here where
this data structure is now a blueprint
dictating how to build the brain and the
body of the robot yeah and we were
walking through this data structure last
time so top Lev a genotype is made up of
four variable length lists in your case
you have one single Vector which is the
set of all synaptic weights here we've
got uh four variable length lists as the
names imply uh the first list encodes a
set of vertices which become the points
uh that you see in the robot here the
next list is a whole bunch of bars that
connect pairs of points together the
third list is a whole bunch of neurons
in this cartoon example here this
particular genotype is specifying this
phenotype down here phenotype is now not
just the brain of the robot but the body
as well the phenotype in this cartoon
example has five neurons inside and you
can see that each of the five neurons
has a synapse connecting it to every
other uh neuron and you can see that in
the description of a single neuron down
here one element in the neurons list we
have a threshold for the activation
function of that neuron and then inside
this list is another list which is the
synapse coefficients or the synaptic
weights so this genotype is a little
confusing it's a whole bunch of lists
embedded in lists embedded in lists
hopefully you get the idea yeah okay the
last piece that we ended with last time
the fourth and final list is a list that
specifies all the actuators that make up
the robot these are slightly different
actuators from what you've seen before
an individual a description of an
individual actuator that description
specifies some bar inside the body of
the robot so we pick a bar it also
specifies a neuron so we have we're
holding on to a bar we we uh find the
neuron that's being specified let's
imagine it's this neuron here we're
going to the actuator takes the value
arriving at this neuron and sends it to
the actuator that's going to be embedded
in this bar so the minute an actuator
points to a neuron that neuron becomes a
motor
neuron okay question so um how do the
actuators move how do the actuators move
exactly okay there's a hint here which
is the third and final number that
describes an actuator is the bar range
again it's kind of cryptic but it might
give you a hint so what do you think is
going on here in terms of the
actuator we're embedding an actuator in
a bar not maybe where you might expect
which is up here we're not dealing with
rotational motorized joints which you've
been dealing with in all the assignments
something
different piston shape to it that's is
the length of the Piston the length of
the Piston what is the maximum and
minimum length of the bar that can be
achieved by a piston that's going to sit
inside the bar so you can imagine that
as you walk as you walk along the
actuators list that actuators list is
going to contain a bunch of these things
each one points to a particular bar and
every time an actuator points to a bar
imagine we cut that bar in half pull it
apart a little bit stick a piston into
into it and then connect a neuron to the
Piston imagine that neuron at a given
point in time is containing a positive
floating point value what do you think
that motor neuron is telling the Piston
to
do expand if that motor neuron is
encoding a negative floating Point
number at a given point in time it's
telling the Piston to
pull got
it okay so that's it we've got a
genotype which tells us how to construct
the body and brain of a robot we've got
our phenotype here we do what we
normally do drop it into a physics
engine which was brand new back in 2000
and assign a fitness value to how well
that robot moves from left to right
along the virtual floor in this in the
physics engine exactly like we've seen
before okay so let's talk a little bit
about the evolutionary uh algorithm they
start with an initial popul
not of random genotypes you could
imagine just creating a whole bunch of
random uh lists with random floating
Point values in it and that would
construct some random morphology and
some random neural network they didn't
do that in this experiment they created
a population of 200 genotypes and each
genotype is
null null meaning it's an empty list of
empty lists of empty lists there's
nothing in the genotype kind of an odd
choice so we know by definition that
each of the 200 phenotypes of those
robots are null phenotypes they're all
going to get a fitness of zero they
don't even create a robot that moves at
all kind of a strange Choice we'll come
back to that in a moment Fitness this is
very familiar displacement of the center
of mass how many time steps do they
evaluate the simulation for if you go
and read the paper it doesn't give you
number of time steps it says fixed
number and that fixed number was 12 of
cycles of the neural control this sounds
kind of cryptic again but we've seen so
it should give you a hint about what the
neural control is doing what what does
12 Cycles mean or what could it
mean it's kind of like attempting 12
steps like if local motion is a cycle
okay if Locomotion is is a cycle this
thing is going to breathe 12 times the
motors are going to increase or the
Pistons are going to increase and
decrease but those Cycles are being
dictated by the brain by the neural
network and they said Cycles not of
locomotion but of the neural controller
itself is
it CES uh that's a good guess in in your
assignments it is right during each time
step if you have a 100 time steps St in
your simulation or a thousand time steps
in your simulation you're doing 100 or a
thousand sense think act Cycles it's a
good guess that's not what they mean uh
parameter updates parameter updates uh
par parameters of what weights uh it
could be but remember the weights are
ultimately going to be updated by the
genotype so we're just talking about
evaluating a single robot in a
simulation during the simulation during
your simulations the parameters of the
neural network the synaptic weights do
not change so another good guess this is
just evidence that they should have
worded this more
carefully do you mean like 12 Evolution
Cycles uh not quite no we're we're
inside the evolutionary algorithm we're
evaluating one robot in the physics
engine does the neural network have one
of those like pulse neurons in it it has
a pulse neuron inside which they don't
mention explicitly I know the authors
very well shame on them there's a cpg
sitting somewhere in here it's a cpg
neuron that is emitting a sinusoidal
pattern and they wait for that
sinusoidal as they're running the
physics engine and the time steps are
elapsing in the physics engine they let
that cpg emit 12 cycles and when it's
done repeat that sosal pattern is done
repeating 12 times they end the
simulation they measure how far the
robot has traveled in the simulator and
assign that single distance that single
floating point value to that robot and
its genotype um can that like pulse
evolve over time or is that like
constant every step it sounds it's a
good question again they didn't specify
but I would infer from this that it's
fixed that all the sinusoidal patterns
in every robot no matter what its body
or brain looks like has more or less the
same frequency I think
so far so good okay so some familiar
Concepts some new Concepts
here why did they start with a null
robot let's draw the null robot right
down here I've drawn nothing there's no
phenotype so the first generation the
first generation of this evolutionary
algorithm is kind of odd they're
stepping through each of these 200
genotypes there's nothing there so
there's no robot to create don't even
need to bother running a simulation you
assign a fitness of zero to all of these
genotypes how do you delete the ones
that have lower Fitness you can't
because everybody has exactly the same
Fitness zero flip a coin delete half of
them half of them survive and now we
start to make randomly modified copies
of the
survivors so far so good okay so
randomly modified copies they're going
to take these null genotypes that have
survived and they're going to start to
randomly modify them they're going to
apply mutations remember that in your
underlying code base at the moment you
have a fixed Vector of floating Point
numbers which specify the synaptic
weights for the neural controller for
your robot you have one and only one
mutation operator whenever that mutation
operator is called it picks some number
it picks some index in your vector and
then generates a random number and
sticks it into that element right one
and only one mutation operator in the
Golem project there are 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
nine 10 different mutation operators 10
different ways that the evolutionary
algorithm can take the genotype this
thing and make a random change to it
question the
I don't know I I don't see why they
couldn't have done that probably an
arbitrary
choice I think um in the original neat
paper they were arguing that you you
start with the simplest thing and you
add complexity only as it is Justified
seems like similar to what they're
trying to good point actually that's a
good point maybe they wanted to make
sure that they were starting with sort
of the simplest robot you could imagine
and then let Evolution gradually
complexify things if it's needed and
what's the simplest possible robot you
can
imagine the null robot just nothing okay
so we have these 100 surviving null
genotypes we're picking one at random
and that becomes the parent and we're
allowing it to cre create a child we're
going to copy that null genotype but
when we do we're going to roll a
10-sided dice we're going to pick one of
these 10 mutation operators at random
and whichever one we pick we're going to
let that mutation operator mutate that
null
genotype so far so good okay so here's a
cartoon showing a possible way this
might happen here's and all we're seeing
here are the phenotypes the B the bodies
and brains of this lineage of robots
we're starting with the first ancestor
which is a null
phenotype we roll a 10-sided Dy whatever
that Dy is we apply that mutation
operator which one turned this null
phenotype into a single bar with the
short
length out of these 10 which was the one
which is the the one that was
chosen which one turned this null
phenotype into this non-null phenotype
uh
three add a dangling Bar number three
add a add a dangling bar absolutely so
we've got a little bar here so this is
the child you take this little bar and
you drop it into the physics engine and
that little bar travels forward by
0.01 millimeters in the simulator it's
got a higher Fitness than its parent
kills off its parent and now it enjoys
the privilege of being able to produce
an off spring of its own which it does
it it whatever the genotype is for this
phenotype is copied and when we're
copying that genotype The evolutionary
algorithm again rolls a 10-sided
die and that mutation causes the child
to look like this which mutation
operator uh was applied to the
grandchild number one change the length
of the bar everybody get it okay
question what are the percentages
account for like that doesn't add up to
100% 20 21 22 23
24 25 26 27 28 29 30 you're right good
question uh I I'm imagining that's a
typo it should add up to
100% okay next one what what turned this
into this
one so we lengthened the bar now there's
a red circle what's the red
circle is that a neuron it's a neuron y
five number five number five add
unconnected neuron so now this robot has
a brain but the brain is not inating the
body whatever the value is in this
neuron which is probably the cpg value
it's not affecting the behavior of the
robot are the percentages representing
the like percentage of times that those
options were selected or is it something
about like the impact of them on
Evolution uh more the former so I I
mentioned a 10-sided die which assumes
that it's a uniform probability of
picking these 10 mutation operators it's
not imagine it's a weighted die this
should these percentages should have add
up to 100% And The investigators had
some intuition that some of these
mutation operators should be applied on
average more often than
not
why why not just leave everything as a
uniform probability distribution any of
these 10 could happen with equal
probability not everything should have
the same impact on the behavior of the
robot at the end some of these mutation
operators you can probably guess have a
bigger or smaller impact on the brain
and body of the robot and thus on how it
behaves in the simulator but if you do
that for the mutations why you start
from like a robot like you should make a
guess that that's probably like I take
extra computation to get to some point
Pro probably yes I I don't know it's
also balanced against them trying to
start with something simple because
again computation is expensive so they
want to start with a very small robot
very simple robot a lot of arbitrary
choices here I think in this
experiment okay how about this one to
this
one what mutation operator or operators
hit this genotype as it was being
copied that's length a bar lengthen the
bar number one yeah add a neuron and
also add a connection add a neur neur
and although there is it doesn't say
here every time we add a neuron all of
the other neurons that exist in the
brain connect to it yeah so it's always
an it's always a fully connected Network
every time we add an unconnected neuron
it doesn't stay unconnected for long
everything else attaches to it which
means we need new numbers in the
genotype we need to specify the
weights we need to specify the weights
of those connections that are arriving
at that neuron so they've got to
generate more random numbers so some of
the ways in which these mutation
operators are being carried out is sort
of implied but hopefully you get the
idea let's Jump Ahead to this one to
this one you'll notice something special
has happened here what's
happened body okay how so what mutation
operator caused that to happen
number nine attach neuron to Bar yeah so
we're going to attach this neuron to
this bar you'll notice this bar is now
cut in half which is a visualization of
the fact that this piston has been
placed in the midpoint of this bar so
we're adding an actuator and innervating
it with a synapse although the name of
the mutation operator kind of implies
that it doesn't say it
explicitly so far so good okay so you
could imagine somewhere else in this
initial population of null uh phenotypes
and genotypes another set of random
choices of mutation operators will
create robots with different bodies and
different
brands questions
okay okay I think we we worked our way
through this okay again I apologize for
the image quality here hopefully you can
see here are a whole bunch of samples of
the kinds of robot bodies that existed
partway through Evolution and we're
looking at not all 200 robots but just a
sampling of them they're partially
evolved so they move to the right a
little bit at this point in evolution
What observations can you draw from
what's going on in this particular
evolutionary run pyramids are cool
pyramids are cool why are pyramids
cool they are cool there's a reason why
they're stable yeah I'm I'm guessing
there doesn't need to be a lot of
coordination to get it to move in a
direction like two things can expand and
it'll push it whereas like a worm would
be harder to do absolutely right Mother
Nature is wonderful but she's also lazy
she's a satisficer we asked her to
design something that moves from left to
right using this kind of encoding of
genotypes and phenotypes turns out that
uh pyramids are cool they're a
relatively easy way to do things I was
going to ask does the sort of set of
mutations that you had on the previous
side does that makes it pretty difficult
to evolve a big brain right I don't know
does this particular choice of how to
encode the robots bias The evolutionary
algorithm to small brains big brains
small bodies big bodies remember our
discussion about hypernet last week
hypernet was designed several years
after this experiment to try and solve
this problem we actually want to
control where we focus Evolution's
attention we want to focus Evolution to
search the space of all symmetric
repeatable types of patterns no matter
what genotype and phenotype and coding
we pick whether we know it or not we're
biasing Evolution to search more more
intensely in certain parts of the space
of all possible robots than
others maybe we're biasing Evolution
towards towards pyramids maybe that's
the reason why we get pyramids in this
experiment not necessarily that they're
useful but that's where it tends to
focus its time are we focusing
evolutionary search on the subset of
robots that have small brands or big
brands
maybe yes maybe
no one thing that come to mind why
attaching of detaching the neurons to a
bars is one choice of the mutations and
it should not just as soon as a neur is
added you connect it to the Rob okay you
will have like some robs that are not
connected to then okay right so we could
decide we could make a change to the way
we map genotypes on to phenotype that
every time we create a neuron it's a
motor neuron and it's got to attach to
some part of the body that's also a
choice how is that going to bias
evolutionary search what kinds of robots
is the evolutionary algorithm going to
try generate more often than
not if we're using that kind of mutation
operator is it going to create robots
that are like
um they're not they don't have like a
very developed like Brain before like
they begin making impact on the robot
itself that that is true now whether
that's a good thing or a bad thing who
knows but that's right as the brain as
mutations start to elaborate the
cognitive architecture the number of
neurons and connectivity in the brain of
the robot every one of those neurons is
going to connect to some actuator in the
robot's body which is going to mean that
all of the bars are actuated or most of
them are going to be actuated which may
or may not be a good thing right it's
hard to say we could try it we could
alter the mutation operators run
Evolution again we're going to get
robots that have more Active Components
inside their body and maybe the
evolutionary algorithm can evolve
synaptic weights to coordinate that
motion or maybe that's too much too soon
it's not a The evolutionary algorithm is
not able to you could make an argument
either way so this is part of the reason
why a lot of these choices tend to be
arbitrary it's hard to know in advance
whether what you're putting into your
genotype and phenotype is going to make
things easier on the evolutionary
algorithm or harder on The evolutionary
algorithm it seems like the goal of this
is to evolve a body that doesn't really
require much coordination to to move I
don't know whether they planned that in
advance but that was a result of this
experiment that you as you'll see and
I'll place videos for you in a moment
you don't need much these robots don't
need much to get going to start
moving okay one of the things you can
take away from here is again there are
some common themes you tend to see a lot
of pyramids but also a fair bit of
diversity the bodies look kind of
different we haven't converged on one
and only one body plan you can infer
from this that if the bodies look
diverse the brains are also probably
divers verse as well there are probably
different brains in these robots with
more or less neurons so different
cognitive architectures different
synaptic weights in them that's usually
a good
thing here's this is a horizontal cut
through an evolving population so
evolution is running at some point they
paused Evolution and looked at all the
bodies and brains at that point in
evolutionary time sorry it's a vertical
cut here's a horizontal or longitudinal
cut
through the same evolutionary run it may
be hard to see in the back here but this
robot has a number four so they're
assigning a global counter they're just
keeping count of all the robots here's
robot number four here's robot number 60
number 82 117
117 down to
198 so here's some here's a fossil this
is from early in the evolutionary record
and here's an existing organism this is
something that exists
towards the end of The evolutionary
trial again it may be hard to see
there's some Fitness values assigned to
all of these f equals a lot of these f
equals are zero so these are not
necessarily good robots these f equals z
means the robot doesn't move at all some
of them have a nonzero value associated
with them some are moving some are not
they're just trying to take slices
through this evolving population to kind
of see what things look like
like
okay here was an attempt to try and do
this not in an anecdotal Way by just
looking at screenshots but to do this in
a quantitative manner if you've ever
taken a biology class you've probably
seen a picture that looks like this
before these are philogenetic trees
we've got usually a root up here
somewhere this is a common ancestor in
this example here this particular uh
robot uh existed in the population for
many many many
generations without producing any
Offspring so it actually survived
somehow at this point in evolutionary
time it produced One Two Three Offspring
and those Offspring in turn started to
produce a lot of Offspring and so on
different ways to there's many many
different ways to draw a philogenetic
tree the choice that the investigators
made here is to to draw evolutionary
time on the vertical axis so here's the
first generation and here's the last
generation down here usually we've been
drawing evolutionary time on the
horizontal axis where time uh unfolds as
we move to the right kind of an
arbitrary Choice the horizontal axis
represents ancestral
proximity what do you think they mean by
that like if if you have like the the
phenotype vectors it's like probably
like the distance between the two I I'm
sure it's there's a way to calculate
just like how close they are there is a
way to calculate how close they are it's
not based on the phenotype strictly
speaking you could take the phenotype
and measure the similarity of phenotype
the more similar they are the closer
they are horizontally the more different
their phenotypes the further away they
are horizontally you could absolutely
draw a philogenetic tree like that it's
not quite what they did is it like like
the performance it's not performance
good point actually nothing here has to
do with Fitness Fitness is not
visualized at all
here ancestral
proximity is it based on like number of
steps of evolution since they were the
same since they were the same so
brothers and sisters most of the time in
this picture should be drawn close to
one another horizontally first cousin
a little bit further apart horizontally
second cousins and so on it's not quite
true it's a little more complicated than
that because you can see there's one
parent up here and three siblings down
here these three siblings should be
drawn right next to one another
horizontally there's some other things
going on in the way they drew this but
generally speaking you get the ideas to
get a family tree you have the ancestor
at the top and then you have more and
more children
if that particular lineage or that
family is successful and is producing
highly fit children and grandchildren
and great grandchildren you see a lot of
these trees tapering off as branches of
this tree die out so let's just take
this little tree down here here was sort
of a cluster of the family A branch of
the family that for whatever reason got
some Fitness but not as much Fitness as
this branch of the family and this
branch of the family family eventually
outcompeted this branch of the family
that's why it's drawn in this way to
help you see those kinds of evolutionary
Dynamics going on okay so let's have a
look at oh and last thing I forgot to
mention is links themselves connect
parents to children okay first thing to
notice uh in this particular
evolutionary run they got Divergence so
they had way up here at the top one
ancestor this was probably uh the first
nonnull phenotype the first thing that
actually moved in the simulator It
produced one two three children way up
here at the top and all three of those
children were successful they started to
produce their own branches and by the
time we get down here to the end we have
uh we have familial
diversity meaning we've got some
brothers and sisters we've got some
first and second cousins we've got
second third cousins fourth fifth 6th
7th 17th 18th 22nd cousins we've got a
diversity of individuals that have to go
further or shorter back in time to find
a common ancestor that's good news right
that generally suggests you've got a lot
of diversity in the population 17th
cousins that have to go back 17
generations to find a common ancestor
they have probably diverged quite a bit
in terms of the makeup of their bodies
and brains so we've got a lot of
diverent phenotypic Divergence which
isn't being plotted directly we're
inferring it from the fact that we have
a lot of familial Divergence or variance
question convergence could mean that and
that happens in nature as well you have
individuals that have common ancestor
way way way back in evolutionary time
but evolutionary pressure is tending to
push everyone in the population to
towards one and only one solution
because there's one and only one way to
do things that that's actually also
possible maybe all of these things down
here seem diverse but if we actually
looked at them they're all pyramids
you'll have to trust me that that's not
the case in these experiments is that
like everything is evolving to become
crab everything is evolving to become a
crab right what is it Carino I forget
what the term carcin ajacent thank you I
can never say that term exactly right
turns out funnily enough there tends to
be certain ways to be in this world or
at least on this planet that are better
than others and the winner at the moment
seems to be crabs not not us crabs okay
good point thank you okay they reran The
evolutionary tape they started Evolution
all over again with a set of 200 null
genotypes and ran Evolution forward
again but now these null genotypes were
being hit with different mutation
operators and different sequences of
mutations that led at The evolutionary
uh scale to very different Dynamics here
we get convergence as was mentioned in
the back there we've got a whole bunch
of individuals down here we've got 200
individuals down here here which all
have a relatively recent common ancestor
it's in it's in here somewhere everybody
see that they're probably they these 200
robots probably all look very similarly
if not identically and probably all move
similarly if not
identically over here we got we get the
emergence of species we had two uh
individuals way way back early in
evolutionary history that were both
successful and spawned massive families
families so big that maybe we want to
refer to these as species this is a
little bit tongue and cheek these aren't
exactly species why
not they don't
share not
quite if they were species in the strict
sense of the
word what would they be able to do or
not able to do they they they would not
be able to like sexually reproduce they
cannot sexually reproduce there is there
is a sexual recombination operator in
here but in the interest of time we're
not going to talk about it these species
can sexually reproduce whether that
produces viable Offspring I have no idea
they just wanted to show that even in
this evolving population you can get uh
in some cases just by chance you can get
uh distinct subgroupings of
robots uh over here we we have a uh we
have all uh uh all except one individual
this individual in the population that
are all similar these are all dinosaurs
they're all doing fantastically well for
a very long period of time and then this
one individual here that had pretty good
Fitness Fitness good enough to compete
among all of these but unlucky in the
sense that it never produced any
Offspring until at this point just by
chance it happened to produce three
offspring that very quickly started to
exhibit faster motion than the
dinosaurus over here and the mammals
over here quickly started to proliferate
and drove this sub population of robots
to
Extinction so even a relatively simple
evolutionary algorithm you can start to
get rich evolutionary Dynamics your
evolutionary algorithm is probably too
simple to see any of that that but again
I wanted to spend a minute on all this
might be an interesting idea for a final
project can you complexify your
evolutionary algorithm so that you start
to see ecological or evolutionary
Dynamics like speciation Extinction
events and so on if you're interested in
that come and see me in office hours and
we can talk about it
okay okay crabs right crabs are a good
way to do things pyramids are another
good way to do things here's a few
examples of what they got from two
different evolutionary runs in one they
got robots that look like
this and you should already start to see
now at this point why pyramids are
good why are pyramids good good in the
sense that it doesn't take Evolution
much to put to Cobble together something
that actually moves in a forward
Direction
does it like consistently like make it
so that the force that's being applied
is only being applied in like One
Direction exactly right if you push
directly against the floor with a normal
force you don't go anywhere but if you
have a body and a brain that allows you
to continuously push against the ground
at an oblique angle and you always push
with that oblique angle you're going to
consistently keep moving in a given
Direction uh for a while right a simple
Hack That Evolution tends to find in
this space so in these top ones is there
only one motor that's being used uh is
there only one
motor uh I think there's two it's a
little difficult to see there's one here
and I think there's another one in here
somewhere one or two one or two it
probably doesn't need the second one one
is probably
sufficient okay carcon whatever it's
called is at work not just on this
planet but on that planet
also how well do you think these designs
are going to cross the reality
Gap I see a lot of you shaking your
heads
vigorously these things look like
they're going to drop into the abyss
right
why they're not really at least to me
they don't look particularly statically
stable ah okay so remember statically
stable remember our discussion about
legged Locomotion to be statically
stable you have a polygon of support on
the ground and your center of mass has
to stay on top of that polygon of
support at every
point it may not look like it but this
simulator was actually made by hand and
they constrained the speed and strength
of the motors in such a way that it's
always statically stable it's a little
tweak of this simulator which we don't
have too much time to go into they
actually pause the simulation after each
time step and they run the simulator
forward in a slightly different way to
let the robots settle so what these
robots are really doing is kind of going
stoping it doesn't you can't see that in
the simulation but these are all
actually always statically stable
because these were good mechanical
engineers they knew their mechanics and
Dynamics they were scared of the reality
Gap they knew that if they evolve
something that was not statically stable
they probably had no chance in heck of
crossing the
Gap it really feels like these are very
dependent on having a flat surface
exactly the right friction the flat
ground with exactly the right
friction what else um I feel like this
this requires that the the simulation is
really dealing well with the connection
of things and kind of they they like
especially the cowd kind of looks like
it has tension in it almost okay yeah so
there's a lot of things that are not
quite accurate in this physics engine
physics engine were invented in the same
year that this experiment was reported
in the literature I know these
investigators they wrote this simulator
by hand this was a brand new thing at
the time people were just figuring out
how to do this so we'll take all this
with a grain of salt you can see they
didn't get the connections quite right
you are all physics engines experts at
this point so you can see some of these
uh things inaccuracies in the simulator
what what's wrong with the joints what's
happening at the joints or what's most
visible at the joints that is not going
to be real in reality clipping what do
you mean by clipping uh the different
bars are interpenetrating they're
interpenetrating right Collision
detection and resolution really hard to
do right in 2024 people are still
working on this problem and Reporting
papers in the literature about how to do
this better It's Tricky hard to do yeah
so there's a lot of things here that
should be causing you to catch your
breath and be nervous as we approach the
gap
but that's what the Golem project is all
about so here we
go okay let's look at the arrow
first they observed this one and decided
to put in the effort to actually build
it just as a reminder everything that
you see in white here in the physical
robot this is thermoplastic so the 3D
printer has printed all of the white
chassis of the robot and you can see
they've snapped in some Motors and
electronics and this thing is dragging a
bunch of wires that are supplying power
and signals to the the
Pistons how'd they
do the physical robot only travels
onethird as far as the physical robot or
travels with onethird the speed probably
for the reason that Nate mentioned
the friction is different you can see
that they're they've got this robot
moving over a very thick carpeted floor
like the one in this room so the
friction is probably slowing the robot
down but also helping easier to move
over thick carpet than it is over sheer
ice so it's sort of
helping why you could argue that this
one crosses the Gap it's not perfect but
it's more or less moving in the way that
we observed in simulation
why was this one successful it's doing
like parsis it's par uh it's kind of
peristalsis yeah you're right there you
you might be able to see a bit of a
traveling wave across the body
peristalsis always a good place to
start it's uh robust like it doesn't
need balance at all remember the four
Deiter of locomotion right one of them
is robustness you got to move without
falling down that's a huge problem for
our species but if you're lying flat on
the ground you don't have to worry about
falling over so it doesn't matter what
kind of ground you're on you won't fall
over and as long as you're pushing
obliquely against the ground and ground
has high
friction it works right so first thing
to take away from the Golem project is
you can cross the reality Gap and some
bodies make it easier to CR cross the
Gap than others if they had evolved a
Hopping bipad robot in their simulator
that's less likely to cross the Gap much
more difficult if it was not statically
stable more difficult yeah so this idea
to try and cross the Gap a whole bunch
of times was sort of brilliant in
retrospect and perhaps uh maybe this
wasn't anticipated beforehand but
actually the choice of body makes a huge
difference okay
here's one of our uh here's one of our
uh pyramids here called The Pusher for
obvious
reasons okay but not so great not quite
in the same direction
[Music]
slower Le less successful
why I think partially because it's less
uh it has more mass that is in contact
ground has more friction because of that
it's got It's got more friction this
one's got quite a bit too which is also
slowing it down how about the
tetrahedron the clear winner from the
Golem
project the camera angles they didn't
shoot from the same camera angle so it
looks like the simulated physical robot
are moving in different
directions very good approximation very
successful crossing of the Gap
why it looks like it's doing an
interesting thing where it's like kind
of pulling up on the back as it pushes
so it has very little friction with the
ground exactly right it's pulling itself
up so it's overcoming whatever friction
there is and the inaccuracies of
friction Visa V what it was in
simulation pushing a little bit more
vertically but still reliably obliquely
so off it
goes so it's kind of about whether the
the strengths of the evolved body align
well with the things in simulation that
were accurate versus the things that
were not correct so if it's strong
enough to match the things in reality
that were correct and it overcomes the
things that are not yes in this simple
case we are poor humble humans those are
the only aspects of this that we can see
that affect whether or not this thing
crosses the Gap what is harder to see is
how close the mass distribution is
between the simulated and physical robot
which also affects whether or not it
crosses the
Gap how much is the set of wires
dragging behind the robot tugging back
on the robot when it moves maybe a
little maybe a lot maybe it matters
maybe it doesn't there's dozens if not
hundreds
of little micro features that are
different between simulation and reality
that you can't see all of the
observations that you made were great
observations but they're just the tip of
the iceberg right and they can lead us
and they led many of us at the time to
think oh reality gaps not so hard
actually okay we're close to a solution
24 years later with more complex robots
and we're going to see a more complex
robot in a moment it's not so easy it's
possible and choosing the right body can
help okay all right so we've spent all
our time so far talking about automated
design and we've looked at some of the
automatically manufactured robots this
is not a a mechanical engineering class
but I think it's fun to just go back in
time and have a look at the advances
that were being made in terms of 3D
printers at the time so let's spend a
little bit of time talking about the
second step of the experiment how did
they actually make these robots has
anybody actually used a a 3D printer
before okay okay great all right so at
the time this was a brand new
technology this is a greatly sped up
version of uh the 3D printer that was
being used at that time one of the very
first 3D printers uh that existed in an
academic lab and you can see it starting
to print one of the cylinders that makes
up uh the robot here's a zoomed in
version of it building a different robot
you you can see here uh a partial build
most of you know by now a 3D printer is
called a printer cuz it's it was based
on the metaphor of an inkjet printer
which splashes ink onto a piece of paper
3D printer does more or less the same
thing it splashes heated up Liquid
plastic onto a base plate which cools
fast enough that they can then splash
another layer and another layer and up
and up you go you're depositing 2D
layers of thermal
plastic but depending on the geometry
the 3D geometry of the thing you want to
build building it in 2D layers is
difficult so these early 3D printers and
a lot of 3D printers today print
additional stuff this is just uh weak
scaffolding to literally hold up the
parts that are being built it took about
eight hours to print each of these
robots um they would print it during the
day and then in the evening they drop
this into a uh into a liquid solution
that would eat away at the plastic
slowly and it would eat away slowly
enough that by the next morning it had
eaten away all the scaffolding but
hadn't done a good enough job eating
away the actual thing you wanted so you
got this you got a whole bunch of
connected Hollow cylinders that's what
3D printers could do at that
time how do you make how do you make a
shoulder joint a passive shoulder joint
in the robot remember that there's a
piston that's pushing and pulling on the
bar but if you have two bars that are
attached by a piston and the Piston
pushes on these two bars the passive
joint has to be able to rotate so they
got very creative in a CAD program and
came up for of with a way of printing
all of this stuff to produce basically a
shoulder joint yeah
passive then they put in the actuators
here's the little here's the little box
of electronics that's controlling the
actuator supplying the power there's a
little battery in here so this little
box is placed just out of camera view
here that's the thing that the robot is
dragging behind
it
okay the nice thing that was realized
about this at the time is that uh when
this was published in 2000 maybe in the
distant future it would be possible to
print these things from recyclable
plastics so they put uh they put the
robot here in a little uh toaster oven
and heated it up remember this is
thermoplastic which has a high melting a
low melting
point and so they melted away and
drained off all this liquid plastic most
uh thermoplastic based 3D printers today
can do this you can actually melt down
whatever it is that you printed and send
that back in as a Raw Feed stock to the
3D
printer 3D printers are a little bit
scary because it allows us to print lots
more stuff cheaply suggesting there's
going to be a lot more trash and plastic
waste on this planet but there is an
attempt to uh to make this part of the
circular economy that once you're done
with something you can literally melt it
down and reuse the parts again
tangential to what we're talking about
in this class but kind of an interesting
way to approach robotics in
general if we can do that if we can melt
down and reuse if we can uh if we can
melt down to
recycle maybe we can reuse it
also just because the journalists
weren't frightened Enough by this
experiment they generated this video as
well just for fun
okay okay so that's the Golem project
another attempt to cross the reality gap
which is the Brute Force attempt right
just design manufacturer design
manufacturer 3D printers were being
invented at the same time so uh I joined
the lab that had just finished the Golem
project at that time and at that time
they were developing an offshoot which
is wouldn't it be great if you coulde if
you could make a 3D printer at home the
way that you most of us have a printer
at home so the Fab at home project was
basically a do-it-yourself project where
you could re buy a lot of these parts
they're very cheap and you could
assemble them at home with common tools
not that difficult and if you knew how
to use CAD uh you could actually make
one of these things and the idea would
be maybe 3D printers would become like
personal computers in the ' 80s what
made computers so ubiquitous it was that
in the 80s everyone started to be able
to afford one had one at home and
started tinkering with it what could you
do with this new thing called a personal
computer The Hope was you could do the
same thing with 3D printers that hasn't
quite materialized yet anybody have a 3D
printer at home okay all right so
maybe okay we'll finish with this uh
this project the rep WP project which
also started about the same time
uh and this was uh this was conducted in
the UK let me see if I can speed this up
a little
bit the rep WAP project a 3D
printer that prints
itself this is uh if you ever make it to
London and you get to the Science Museum
you can see exactly that machine in the
museum it is arguably the first machine
that can print all of its own parts
it still has to rely on those darn
humans to do the last little piece which
is to put all the pieces together into a
new rep wrap machine oh and also buy the
parts and so on so not completely
automated you can see it's a machine
made up of a lot of parts with complex
geometry and
interconnectedness just for fun Imagine
a hypothetical evolutionary algorithm
attached to this you can evolve the
design and function of this rep WAP
machine to print a copy of
itself what kind of Fitness function
might you apply to this evolutionary
algorithm user satisfaction score user
what do you mean by user satisfaction
score this is still a product for people
who want to do 3D prints how happy are
they with the results awesome absolutely
yeah involve humans in this and get them
to put a score from one to 10 about how
fun it was to build the next version of
a rep rap machine it's like the score of
it it depends on how well the child does
ah the score of the child depends on how
well the grandchild does so we we can
assign let's you're right we could keep
going let's imagine a fitness function
that actually is a combination of how
well the parent and the child does what
do you mean by does what do would you
measure about the parent and child I
think you would need a benchmark build
like just a template object that they
would have to build every generation and
you would measure the speed and accuracy
with which okay right so we modify this
rep wrap machine so that it doesn't just
print rep wrap components it makes
something else as well and the speed or
the Precision or the quality
at which it makes this other thing
becomes the fitness function and let's
run that hypothetical evolutionary
algorithm in our head over evolutionary
time we'd get rep wraps that are able to
better build the thing we actually want
them to build faster cheaper and so on
that's one possible way to go what else
um so could we could we evolve it for
the speed at which it can produce
another rep absolutely so you you can
try this yourself go to the rep WAP
website it'll send you to Amazon to buy
all the parts and you got to assemble
them it takes a while it's very
frustrating user satisfaction score I
can tell you as a user is very low it's
very frustrating lots of swear words so
maybe we evolve it to facilitate the
speed at which you can build another
one this first rep wrap I forget how
what percentage of Parts it's able to
print it can't print all the parts of
its child it's like 70
90% maybe we include that in the fitness
function evolve self-replicating
machines that can print more of Their
Own
Parts evolve rep rap machines that print
a version of themselves that's 10%
larger than the parent or 10% smaller
than the parent lots of ways you could
go with
this okay that's just for fun okay we've
got 10 minutes left so we looked at the
radical envelope of noise hypothesis
from the mid 90s 5 years later the Golem
project in 2000 we're now going to talk
about the resilient machines project
which was reported in the literature in
2006 by Yours Truly this was a project
that I was involved with this was a
collaboration between myself and hod
Lipson one of the uh workers on the
Golem project so I teamed up with hod
let's come up with a new way to solve
the sim tooreal problem I'll show you
how the resilient machines project
solves the sim toore problem uh in a
moment there was a second goal for this
project not just come up with an
algorithm that guarantees that robots
transfer from simulation to reality this
was work that was funded by NASA and so
we had to also satisfy NASA what NASA
Engineers are particularly terrified of
is using millions and possibly billions
of taxpayer dollars to develop a very
complex and expensive Rover take five or
20 years to send a Rover somewhere in
the solar system Rover gets there and
things don't work something goes
wrong for that very reason NASA is is
probably the most conservative
engineering firm on the planet there's
redundancy within redundancy within
redundancy every single project that
nask tackles is super expensive tons of
people hours and takes you know unfolds
over years or decades so they're very
very careful however on the flip side
they also know that wherever they're
sending their probes it's a very
uncertain environment so there's lots of
things that can go wrong there's lots of
unknown
so NASA also spends a lot of time
working on what they call methods of
Last Resort if a very expensive Rover is
uh sitting somewhere in the solar system
on an extraplanetary body and the
mission is about to fail you're about to
lose the whole thing then and only then
will NASA consider seeding autonomy to
the Rover meaning Mission Control takes
their hands off the joystick Mission
Control says I don't know what's going
on on where you are but clearly
something's really wrong Rover you try
and figure it out so they funded us not
to solve the sim toore problem but to
develop a method of Last Resort what
algorithm should you package onto the
Rover so that someone on Mission Control
can just push a button and it starts
that algorithm the the Rover or the
robot itself starts to try and figure
out what's gone wrong diagnose the
problem and find a way to recover
okay so we did that here it
goes so here's uh here's the RO here's
the robot which has taught itself to
walk and as you can imagine we did this
in simulation first and then transferred
it to reality so the mission here is
just get from the left side of the table
to the right side of the table this is
phase one of the experiment in the Golem
project this was everything in your pro
in your assignments it's everything
that's all that matters but what happens
if after it's evolved the ability to
walk something goes wrong so you'll
notice now that we sent a grad student
in with a screwdriver and he has
mechanically separated the right lower
leg of the robot and the motor that used
to sit at the uh at the knee of the
robot is still connected to the robot
the robot is still still sending
commands to the motors but it's not
walking anymore something has gone wrong
you can clearly see what's gone wrong
and you might even be able to dream up a
way for this robot to walk with three
and a half legs rather than the original
four legs that it has the trick here is
that the robot can't see what's gone
wrong and neither can mission control so
I just want you to assume that you can't
see what's actually gone
wrong the robot is sensing that
something has changed the way the kinds
of sensory information that it was
getting from here is different something
has happened so the robot has two
problems it's got to solve it's got to
diagnose what's gone wrong and it's got
to come up with a compensating
controller it's got to come up with a
new way to move because its mission is
still the same get from the left side of
the table to the right side of the table
so in this 10,000 ft view of this
experiment which is made up of these
three parts between the second and third
phase of this experiment the robot has
successfully figured out what's gone
wrong and it's come up with a way to
recover I haven't told you how it does
that
yet
it's not going to win the Dancing with
the Stars competition not the most
graceful machine you've ever seen but it
does recover the ability to move from
the left side of the table to the right
side of the table it's moving slower
it's not moving as straight as it does
before but from NASA's perspective this
is way better than having to hold a
press conference the next morning and
tell the US taxpayer sorry game over we
got to start
again perhaps this machine can still
extract some of the science or whatever
it is that the Rover is meant to do so
far so good okay all right we got 5
minutes left so let's dive into each of
these three phases of the experiment to
see exactly how the robot diagnoses
problem unexpected problems and recovers
from
them okay before we dive into the
details let's just sort of step back for
a moment we're going to see how this
experiment contrasts to all the other
evolutionary robotics experiments we've
seen so far one of the things that tends
to underly everything we've seen so far
is evolve a controller for a robot or
evolve the robot itself like we just saw
in the Golem project evolve the
controller Andor robot to automatically
discover near optimal Behavior we never
know whether the evolutionary process is
found optimal Behavior we just hope that
it's getting better and better how how
do we go about doing this there's three
at the time there were three existing
ways to do this evolve controllers
directly on the physical robot obviously
the first experiments that we saw in
this field that's what they did because
there was no other way to do it at the
time there was just the physical robot
with the Advent of phys uh the problem
with this of course is it takes a long
time to do this we got to valuate
hundreds or thousands of controllers on
the physical robot first of all NASA
hates this imagine you have a damaged
Rover that is sitting on the slope of a
crater on some planet or moon and the
robot just spends just starts to
randomly try
things it's the last thing NASA wants
most of the things a machine might try
are going to make things worse not
better better yeah so this is
unsatisfying for us as roboticist it's
it's labor intensive and also very
dangerous for a machine in the wild to
do so the most common solution we've
seen in this class is create a
simulation of the robot and do all of
the evolution in the
simulator then cross your fingers
transfer the controller to reality but
of course there's a problem with that
approach which
is the Gap right okay there's another
problem with this which we haven't
really mentioned which is you need to
make the simulator itself for the grad
students that are on D5 you've spent D1
through D4 making a physics engine from
scratch for uh the 10 assignments I gave
you most of the physics engine but still
it took a lot of effort to actually make
the simulator before you actually
started to evolve the robot so there's
actually two big problems with evolve in
simulation and then transfer to
reality third approach we haven't talked
about in this class but used to be
popular is uh create a controller by
hand use your Genius as a robotics
engineer to figure out how sensation
should be transformed into action to
produce whatever Behavior you want and
really hard to do but make something
that's kind of okay and then allow
Evolution to tune up that hand created
controller on the physical robot
obviously there's a problem with this
approach as well what is it it Rees IM
amount
inition absolutely super super hard to
do isn't that what reinforcement
learning pretty much to uh yes and
reinforcement learning is very
successful but requires the physical
robot reinforcement learning has not yet
figured out how to learn the body plan
itself so there's an implicit assumption
here as well is that ultimately all
these methods have to decide decide on
the body and brain as well as we just
saw in the Golem project the body
matters matters a lot but you're right
if you think you have the right body
plan for the job then you probably don't
need evolutionary Robotics and you can
go use reinforcement learning but if you
don't quite know what the body should be
and actually that's true for NASA they
tend to send wheel Rovers but there's
now an ornithopter up there as well n is
in the process of trying lots of
different body plans for robot probes as
well it's not clear what the optimal
body plan is for exploring a particular
planetary
body okay so uh the resilient machines
project it's got a lot of different
names and there's a lot of different
goals so we just saw uh one of the goals
of the resilient machines project which
is to enable a robot to recover from
unexpected
situations the other thing that I
designed the experiment the resilient
machines project to do was to try and
overcome uh these
problems we used to call the resilient
machines project the estimation
exploration algorithm it's a mouthful
and it's kind of boring and it doesn't
really capture what it does so you can
sort of skip over
this what we're going to what you're
going to see in the resilient machines
project is we're going to uh or the
resil this algorithm is going to evolve
controllers in Sim
and transfer them to the physical robot
like we've seen now a couple times but
the algorithm is also going to uh it's
going to evolve the simulator itself we
are not going to create a simulator from
scratch we're going to evolve a
simulator what do you think the fitness
is of a population of physics engines if
you're going to evolve a good physics
engine what do you want that physics
engine to have given specific conditions
in the real world how well does the
simulators next time step match the
actual experience of next time
absolutely so you're going to see uh
you're going to see an evolutionary
algorithm inside the resilient machine
project which is not evolving robots
it's not evolving controllers for robots
it's evolving simulators to be accurate
how do we know if a simulator is
accurate we need information from The
Real World so what what you're going to
see you're going to see several new
things in the resilient machines project
the first the thing that we'll see at
the beginning of next time is not sim to
real but real to sim the physical robot
is going to collect sensor motor
information and send it back to the
evolutionary algorithm and that
evolutionary algorithm is going to use
that as raw material to evolve an
accurate simulator we'll pause there for
today you have a quiz due tonight you're
working on either A10 or D5 we'll talk
about the final project when we meet
again on Tuesday until then